"How-to" document describing VCN and JPEG metrics and tracing (#186)
ROCm/rocprofiler-systems: docs/how-to/vcn-jpeg-sampling.rst

.. meta::
   :description: ROCm Systems Profiler VCN and JPEG activity sampling and tracing
   :keywords: rocprof-sys, rocprofiler-systems, ROCm, tips, how to, profiler, tracking, VCN, JPEG, rocdecode, rocjpeg, AMD

********************************************
VCN and JPEG activity sampling and tracing
********************************************

> `ROCm Systems Profiler <https://github.com/ROCm/rocprofiler-systems>`_ supports  activity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ROCm Systems Profiler <https://github.com/ROCm/rocprofiler-systems>`_ supports 
```

> sampling of VCN and JPEG engines, as well as tracing for `rocDecode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sampling of VCN and JPEG engines activities. It allows you to gather key performance metrics, such as VCN utilization and frames per second (FPS), and understand engine utilization through visualization. You can use this information to optimize the media and video workloads. It also supports tracing of `rocDecode
```

> <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocDecode/en/latest/>`_, `rocJPEG

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocDecode/en/latest/>`_ APIs, `rocJPEG
```

> <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocJPEG/en/latest/>`_, and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocJPEG/en/latest/>`_ APIs, and the
```

> `VA-API (Video Acceleration API)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Video Acceleration APIs (VA-APIs). Tracing of these APIs provides you with insight into how different components of the video encoding and decoding workload interact with the VCN engine.
```
Need to validate this information.

> Sampling Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sampling support
```
Following sentence-casing for titles.

=================

> VCN and JPEG engine activity sampling is supported through `AMD-SMI <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/amdsmi/en/latest/>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sampling of VCN and JPEG engine activity can be enabled through `AMD SMI <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/amdsmi/en/latest/>`_. AMD SMI provides the interface to enable GPU metric collection and allow ROCm Systems Profiler to retrieve the VCN and JPEG activity metrics and monitor the performance. 
```

> and tracing via the `ROCprofiler-SDK <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocprofiler-sdk/en/latest/index.html)>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> for the `rocDecode` and `rocJPEG` APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> To enable GPU metric collection, set the following environment variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set the ``ROCPROFSYS_USE_AMD_SMI`` environment variable to enable GPU metric collection:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  export ROCPROFSYS_USE_AMD_SMI=true

> Then, to collect VCN and JPEG activity metrics, update the `ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS`` variable. The default value is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Update the ``ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS`` variable to collect the VCN and JPEG activity metrics. The default value is:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS=busy,temp,power,mem_usage

> To include VCN and JPEG metrics, update it to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To include VCN and JPEG activity metrics, update it to:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS=busy,temp,power,mem_usage,vcn_activity,jpeg_activity

> Alternatively, you can use the following to collect all available GPU metrics.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can use the following to collect all available GPU metrics:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS=all

> API Tracing Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API tracing support
```

=====================

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracing of rocDecode and rocJPEG APIs can be enabled through `ROCprofiler-SDK <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocprofiler-sdk/en/latest/index.html)>`_. ROCprofiler-SDK provides runtime-independent APIs for tracing the runtime calls and asynchronous activities associated with decoder activities and workload in VCN engines.
```
Need to validate this information.

> To trace rocDecode and/or rocJPEG APIs, modify the `ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS` variable. The default value is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to update the `ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS` variable to enable tracing for the rocDecode and rocJPEG APIs. The default value is:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS=hip_runtime_api,marker_api,kernel_dispatch,memory_copy,scratch_memory,page_migration

> To include tracing for decode and JPEG APIs, add rocdecode_api and rocjpeg_api:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add ``rocdecode_api`` and ``rocjpeg_api`` to include tracing for rocDecode and rocJPEG APIs:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS=hip_runtime_api,marker_api,kernel_dispatch,memory_copy,scratch_memory,page_migration,rocdecode_api,rocjpeg_api

> Note: When either `rocdecode_api` or `rocjpeg_api` is enabled, VA-API tracing is also enabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

By default, enabling ``rocdecode_api`` or ``rocjpeg_api`` also enables VA-API tracing.
```

> To explore all supported tracing domains, use the `get_callback_tracing_names()` and `get_buffer_tracing_names()` APIs in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To explore all supported tracing domains, use the ``get_callback_tracing_names()`` and ``get_buffer_tracing_names()`` APIs. For more details on the APIs, refer to `ROCprofiler-SDK Developer Docs <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocprofiler-sdk/en/latest/_doxygen/rocprofiler-sdk/html/>`_.
```

`ROCprofiler-SDK Developer Docs <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocprofiler-sdk/en/latest/_doxygen/rocprofiler-sdk/html/>`_.

> Example usage with rocDecode and rocJPEG samples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using rocDecode and rocJPEG samples
```

================================================

> For testing purposes, use the `rocDecode samples <https://github.com/ROCm/rocDecode?tab=readme-ov-file#using-sample-application>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For testing purposes, you can use the `rocDecode samples <https://github.com/ROCm/rocDecode?tab=readme-ov-file#using-sample-application>`_ 
```

and `rocJPEG samples <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG?tab=readme-ov-file#using-sample-application>`_.

> To generate sufficient load for VCN and JPEG engines, we recommend the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For generating sufficient load for VCN and JPEG engines, you can use the following samples:
```

For video decoding:

>   - `videoDecodeBatch <https://github.com/ROCm/rocDecode/tree/develop/samples/videoDecodeBatch>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `Video decode batch <https://github.com/ROCm/rocDecode/tree/develop/samples/videoDecodeBatch>`_
```

>   - `videoDecodePerf <https://github.com/ROCm/rocDecode/tree/develop/samples/videoDecodePerf>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `Video decode performance <https://github.com/ROCm/rocDecode/tree/develop/samples/videoDecodePerf>`_
```

For JPEG decoding:

>   - `jpegDecodeBatched <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodeBatched>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `JPEG decode batched <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodeBatched>`_
```

>   - `jpegDecodePerf <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodePerf>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `JPEG decode perf <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodePerf>`_
```

> Follow the build steps mentioned in the sample documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After completing the build steps mentioned in the sample documentation, proceed with the following steps:
```

> 1. Source the ROCm Systems Profiler Environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Source the ROCm Systems Profiler Environment using:
```

> source /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/rocprofiler-systems/setup-env.sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell

source /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/rocprofiler-systems/setup-env.sh
```

> Alternatively, if using modules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if you are using modules, use:
```

> module use /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/modulefiles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell

module use /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/modulefiles
```

> 2. Generate and Configure the Profiler Config File

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Generate and configure the profiler config file.
```

.. code-block:: shell

  rocprof-sys-avail -G $HOME/.rocprofsys.cfg -F txt
  export ROCPROFSYS_CONFIG_FILE=$HOME/.rocprofsys.cfg

> Edit .rocprofsys.cfg with the following settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit ``.rocprofsys.cfg`` with the following settings:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_USE_AMD_SMI     = true
  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS = busy,temp,power,mem_usage,vcn_activity,jpeg_activity
  ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS    = hip_runtime_api,marker_api,kernel_dispatch,memory_copy,scratch_memory,page_migration,rocdecode_api,rocjpeg_api

> 3. Profile the rocDecode Sample

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Profile the rocDecode sample.
```

.. code-block:: shell

  rocprof-sys-sample -v 2 -PTHD -- ./videodecodebatch -i /opt/rocm/share/rocdecode/video/

> [If the ``rocdecode-dev`` package is installed, then the sample videos will be located in ``/opt/rocm/share/rocdecode/video``, by default.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

If the ``rocdecode-dev`` package is installed, then the sample videos will be located in ``/opt/rocm/share/rocdecode/video``, by default.
```

> The verbose flag, ``-v 2``, enables extensive logging and debug output. At the end of the run, a message similar to the one below will be seen::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The verbose flag, ``-v 2``, enables extensive logging and debug output. At the end of the run, a similar message similar appears:
```

  [rocprofiler-systems][964294][perfetto]> Outputting '/home/demo/rocprofsys-videodecodebatch-output/2025-04-25_15.52/perfetto-trace-964294.proto'
  (2792.91 KB / 2.79 MB / 0.00 GB)... Done

To view the generated ``.proto`` file in the browser, open the
`Perfetto UI page <https://ui.perfetto.dev/>`_. Then, click on

> ``Open trace file`` and select the ``.proto`` file. In the browser, it looks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``Open trace file`` and select the ``.proto`` file. In the browser, a similar visualization is generated.
```

> like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

.. image:: ../data/rocprof-sys-vcn-activity.png
   :alt: Visualization of a performance graph in Perfetto with VCN Activity tracks

.. image:: ../data/rocprof-sys-rocdecode.png
   :alt: Visualization of a performance graph in Perfetto with rocdecode and VA-API traces

> 4. Profile the rocJPEG Sample

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To profile the rocJPEG sample, use:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  rocprof-sys-sample -v 2 -PTHD -- ./jpegdecodeperf -i /opt/rocm/share/rocjpeg/image/

> [If rocjpeg-dev is installed, the sample images will be available in this directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

If ``rocjpeg-dev`` package is installed, then the sample images will be located in the ``/opt/rocm/share/rocjpeg/image/`` directory. Duplicate the images to generate enough workload to see activity in the trace.
```

> Duplicate the images to generate enough workload to see activity in the trace.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For JPEG decoding:
  - `jpegDecodeBatched <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodeBatched>`_
  - `jpegDecodePerf <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodePerf>`_

Follow the build steps mentioned in the sample documentation.

1. Source the ROCm Systems Profiler Environment

source /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/rocprofiler-systems/setup-env.sh
Alternatively, if using modules:
module use /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/modulefiles

2. Generate and Configure the Profiler Config File

.. code-block:: shell

  rocprof-sys-avail -G $HOME/.rocprofsys.cfg -F txt
  export ROCPROFSYS_CONFIG_FILE=$HOME/.rocprofsys.cfg

Edit .rocprofsys.cfg with the following settings:

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_USE_AMD_SMI     = true
  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS = busy,temp,power,mem_usage,vcn_activity,jpeg_activity
  ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS    = hip_runtime_api,marker_api,kernel_dispatch,memory_copy,scratch_memory,page_migration,rocdecode_api,rocjpeg_api

3. Profile the rocDecode Sample

.. code-block:: shell

  rocprof-sys-sample -v 2 -PTHD -- ./videodecodebatch -i /opt/rocm/share/rocdecode/video/

> [If rocdecode-dev is installed, the sample videos will be located at the above path by default.]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the ``rocdecode-dev`` package is installed, then the sample videos will be located in ``/opt/rocm/share/rocdecode/video``, by default.
```

> The verbose flag -v 2 enables extensive logging and debug output. At the end of the run, a message like the following will indicate the trace file::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The verbose flag, ``-v 2``, enables extensive logging and debug output. At the end of the run, a message similar to the one below will be seen ::
```

  [rocprofiler-systems][964294][perfetto]> Outputting '/home/demo/rocprofsys-videodecodebatch-output/2025-04-25_15.52/perfetto-trace-964294.proto'
  (2792.91 KB / 2.79 MB / 0.00 GB)... Done

To view the generated ``.proto`` file in the browser, open the
`Perfetto UI page <https://ui.perfetto.dev/>`_. Then, click on
``Open trace file`` and select the ``.proto`` file. In the browser, it looks
like this:

.. image:: ../data/rocprof-sys-vcn-activity.png
   :alt: Visualization of a performance graph in Perfetto with VCN Activity tracks

>    :height: 200px 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :height: 200
```
I don't think you need the "px". Also, the spell-check is catching it for some reason.

.. meta::
   :description: ROCm Systems Profiler VCN and JPEG activity sampling and tracing
   :keywords: rocprof-sys, rocprofiler-systems, ROCm, tips, how to, profiler, tracking, VCN, JPEG, rocDecode, rocjpeg, AMD

********************************************
VCN and JPEG activity sampling and tracing
********************************************

`ROCm Systems Profiler <https://github.com/ROCm/rocprofiler-systems>`_ supports
sampling of VCN and JPEG engines activities. It allows you to gather key performance metrics for
VCN utilization and understand engine utilization through visualization. You can use this information
to optimize the media and video workloads. It also supports tracing of `rocDecode
<https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocDecode/en/latest/>`_ APIs, `rocJPEG
<https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocJPEG/en/latest/>`_ APIs, and the

> Video Acceleration APIs (VA-APIs). Tracing of these APIs provides you with insight into how different

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Video Acceleration APIs (VA-APIs). Tracing these APIs provides you with insight into how different
```

components of the video encoding and decoding workload interact with the VCN engine.

Sampling support
=================

> Sampling of VCN and JPEG engine activity can be enabled through `AMD-SMI <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/amdsmi/en/latest/>`_.

Reviewer 2: I want to make sure that it is clear to the user that they don't need to use an external tool to acquire this sampling data. It is all done "under-the-hood" by rocprof-sys. 
Of course, referencing AMD-SMI is fine, but maybe we should change the message to something like "rocprof-sys uses amd-smi to ... and this is how we enable that feature."

Note, the same is true in the ROCProfiler-SDK section below.

> Sampling of VCN and JPEG engine activity can be enabled through `AMD-SMI <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/amdsmi/en/latest/>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sampling of VCN and JPEG engine activity can be enabled through `AMD-SMI <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/amdsmi/en/latest/>`_.
```

1. Set the ``ROCPROFSYS_USE_AMD_SMI`` environment variable to enable GPU metric collection:

.. code-block:: shell

  export ROCPROFSYS_USE_AMD_SMI=true

2. Update the ``ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS`` variable to collect the VCN and JPEG activity metrics. The default value is:

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS=busy,temp,power,mem_usage

To include VCN and JPEG activity metrics, update it to:

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS=busy,temp,power,mem_usage,vcn_activity,jpeg_activity

Alternatively, you can use the following to collect all available GPU metrics:

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS=all

API tracing support
=====================

Tracing of rocDecode and rocJPEG APIs can be enabled through `ROCprofiler-SDK <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocprofiler-sdk/en/latest/index.html)>`_.
ROCprofiler-SDK provides runtime-independent APIs for tracing the runtime calls and asynchronous activities associated with decoder activities and workload in VCN and JPEG engines.

> You need to update the `ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS` variable to enable tracing for the rocDecode and rocJPEG APIs. The default value is:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need to update the ``ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS`` variable to enable tracing for the rocDecode and rocJPEG APIs. The default value is:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS=hip_runtime_api,marker_api,kernel_dispatch,memory_copy,scratch_memory,page_migration

Add ``rocdecode_api`` and ``rocjpeg_api`` to include tracing for rocDecode and rocJPEG APIs:

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS=hip_runtime_api,marker_api,kernel_dispatch,memory_copy,scratch_memory,page_migration,rocdecode_api,rocjpeg_api

.. note::

   By default, enabling ``rocdecode_api`` or ``rocjpeg_api`` also enables VA-API tracing.

> To explore all supported tracing domains, use the ``get_callback_tracing_names()`` and ``get_buffer_tracing_names()`` APIs.

Reviewer 2: I'd rather we point users to our "-avail" utility, rather than pointing them to APIs. The below link to the "Developer Docs" for additional information is good.

For example, 
```
$ rocprof-sys-avail -bd -r ROCM_DOMAINS

|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|   ENVIRONMENT VARIABLE   |                                                                                                                              DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                               |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS  | Specification of ROCm domains to trace/profile. Choices: hip_api, hip_compiler_api, hip_compiler_api_ext, hip_runtime_api, hip_runtime_api_ext, hip_stream, hsa_amd_ext_api, hsa_api, hsa_core_api, hsa_finalize_ext_api, hsa_image_ext_api, kernel_dispatch,          |
|                          |   marker_api, memory_allocation, memory_copy, ompt, page_migration, rccl_api, rocdecode_api, rocdecode_api_ext, rocjpeg_api, runtime_initialization, scratch_memory                                                                                                    |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|   
```

Author: Thanks for pointing this. I completely agree to this.

For JPEG decoding:
  - `JPEG decode batched <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodeBatched>`_
  - `JPEG decode perf <https://github.com/ROCm/rocJPEG/tree/develop/samples/jpegDecodePerf>`_

After completing the build steps mentioned in the sample documentation, proceed with the following steps:

1. Source the ROCm Systems Profiler Environment using:

.. code-block:: shell

   source /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/rocprofiler-systems/setup-env.sh

Alternatively, if you are using modules, use:

.. code-block:: shell

   module use /opt/rocprofiler-systems/share/modulefiles

2. Generate and configure the profiler config file.

.. code-block:: shell

   rocprof-sys-avail -G $HOME/.rocprofsys.cfg -F txt
   export ROCPROFSYS_CONFIG_FILE=$HOME/.rocprofsys.cfg

Edit ``.rocprofsys.cfg`` with the following settings:

.. code-block:: shell

  ROCPROFSYS_USE_AMD_SMI     = true
  ROCPROFSYS_AMD_SMI_METRICS = busy,temp,power,mem_usage,vcn_activity,jpeg_activity
  ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_DOMAINS    = hip_runtime_api,marker_api,kernel_dispatch,memory_copy,scratch_memory,page_migration,rocdecode_api,rocjpeg_api

> 3. Profile the rocDecode sample

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Profile the rocDecode sample.
```

.. code-block:: shell

  rocprof-sys-sample -v 2 -PTHD -- ./videodecodebatch -i /opt/rocm/share/rocdecode/video/

.. note::

   If the ``rocdecode-dev`` package is installed, then the sample videos will be located in ``/opt/rocm/share/rocdecode/video``, by default.

> The verbose flag, ``-v 2``, enables extensive logging and debug output. At the end of the run, a similar message appears::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The verbose flag, ``-v 2``, is optional and enables extensive logging and debug output. At the end of the run, a similar message appears::
```
Also, if you are just including the verbose logging for the "output file" message, then you don't need to do this. It is a standard message and "-v" is not required.
